Created Metaquantome Function and Taxonomy GTN (#2075)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/proteomics/tutorials/metaquantome-taxonomy/tutorial.md

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

title: "metaQuantome 3: Taxonomy"
zenodo_link: "https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4110725"
questions:

>  - "How do I look at differentially expressed taxa ?"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - "How do I look at differentially expressed taxa?"
```

 - "Can we get top 5 or 10 taxa present in the sample?"
 - "How can I visualize my results?"
objectives:
  - "A taxonomy and quantitational analysis of metaproteomic mass spectrometry data."
time_estimation: "1h"
key_points:
  - "Statistical analysis of the differentially expressed taxa in the metaproteomics sample and their abundance."
contributors:
  - subinamehta
  - timothygriffin
  - pratikdjagtap
  - emmaleith
  - mariecrane
  - pravs3683

follow_up_training:

    -
        type: "internal"
        topic_name: proteomics
        tutorials:
            - metaproteomics
       
        
        type: "internal"
        topic_name: proteomics
        tutorials:
            - metaquantome-function
            
requirements:

   -
   
        type: "internal"
        topic_name: proteomics
        tutorials:
           - metaquantome-data-creation

---

# Introduction
{:.no_toc}

> metaQuantome {% cite Easterly2019 %} software suite was developed by the {% cite Galaxy-P %} for quantitative and statistical analysis of metaproteomics data. For taxonomic and functional expression analysis within the microbial community, metaQuantome leverages peptide-level quantitative information to generate visual outputs for data interpretation. It also generates outputs that help in understanding the taxonomic contribution to a selected function as well as functions expressed by selected taxonomic group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
metaQuantome software suite ({% cite Easterly2019 %}) was developed by the {% cite Galaxy-P %} for quantitative and statistical analysis of metaproteomics data. For taxonomic and functional expression analysis within the microbial community, metaQuantome leverages peptide-level quantitative information to generate visual outputs for data interpretation. It also generates outputs that help in understanding the taxonomic contribution to a selected function as well as functions expressed by selected taxonomic group.
```

In this tutorial, we will learn specifically about the metaQuantome Taxonomy workflow. In particular, we will learn about how peptide-level quantitation and associated taxonomic information can be used to generate bar plots (for taxonomic composition), volcano plots (to detect differentially expressed taxa) and heatmap cluster analysis. 

> To demonstrate the use of this workflow, we have used a thermophilic biogas reactor dataset wherein municipal food waste and manure is digested to generate methane gas {% cite Delogu2020 %}. After one round in the reactor, the microbial community was simplified and enriched via serial dilution. This inoculum was then transferred to a solution of cellulose from Norwegian Spruce and incubated at 65°C. Triplicate samples were taken in a time series from 0 to 43 hours after inoculation and mass spectrometry data was acquired on a Q-Exactive (Thermo) mass spectrometer. For this training, we have chosen three time points (8 hours, 18 hours and 33 hours) from this dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To demonstrate the use of this workflow, we have used a thermophilic biogas reactor dataset wherein municipal food waste and manure is digested to generate methane gas ({% cite Delogu2020 %}). After one round in the reactor, the microbial community was simplified and enriched via serial dilution. This inoculum was then transferred to a solution of cellulose from Norwegian Spruce and incubated at 65°C. Triplicate samples were taken in a time series from 0 to 43 hours after inoculation and mass spectrometry data was acquired on a Q-Exactive (Thermo) mass spectrometer. For this training, we have chosen three time points (8 hours, 18 hours and 33 hours) from this dataset.
```

![MetaQuantome-taxonomy-workflow](../../images/mQ-taxa-workflow.jpg){: width="100%"}

> ### Agenda
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

# **Pretreatments**

> The first step in a tutorial is to get the data from the zenodo link provided and making sure that it is in the correct format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first step in this tutorial is to get the data from the Zenodo link provided and make sure that it is in the correct format.
```

## *Get data*

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Data upload
>
> 1. Create a new history for this tutorial and give it a meaningful name.
>
>    {% include snippets/create_new_history.md %}
>    {% include snippets/rename_history.md %}
>

> > 2. Import the files: a Taxonomy File, an Intensity file from [Zenodo]({{ page.zenodo_link }})
> >    or from the shared data library (`GTN - Material` -> `{{ page.topic_name }}` -> `{{ page.title }}`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 2. Import the files from [Zenodo]({{ page.zenodo_link }}): a Functional File and an Intensity file.
```

>
>    ```
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4110725/files/Intensity-File.tabular
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4110725/files/Taxonomy-File.tabular
>
>    ```

> >    {% include snippets/import_via_link.md %}
> > Alternatively, import the files from the shared data library (`GTN - Material` -> `{{ page.topic_name }}` -> `{{ page.title }}`)
> >
> >

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>    {% include snippets/import_via_link.md %}
>
>    Alternatively, import the files from the shared data library (`GTN - Material` -> `{{ page.topic_name }}` -> `{{ page.title }}`)
>
>    {% include snippets/import_from_data_library.md %}
>
>
```

Reviewer: You can use the `{% include snippets/import_from_data_library.md %}` snippet here with instructions for loading files from a shared data libray.

> >    {% include snippets/import_from_data_library.md %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>
> Alternatively, import the files from the shared data library (`GTN - Material` -> `{{ page.topic_name }}` -> `{{ page.title }}`)
> 
>    {% include snippets/import_from_data_library.md %}
```

> > 3. Check that the datatype ( Make sure they were imported correct formats).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 3. Check that the files are the correct datatypes. The Functional File should be datatype `tabular` and the Intensity File should also be datatype `tabular`.
```

>  Taxonomy File (format=`tabular`), an Intensity file (format=`tabular`)
>

> >    {% include snippets/change_datatype.md datatype="datatypes" %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>    {% include snippets/change_datatype.md datatype="tabular" %}
```

>
> 1. {% tool [metaQuantome: create samples file](https://toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/view/galaxyp/metaquantome_sample/49a957fb353a) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-select %} *"Sample file creation method"*: `Manually specify experimental conditions and samples`
>    - In *"Insert Samples"*:
>        - *"1.Samples"*: 
>            - *"Group Name"*: `T2`
>               - *"Column"*: `T2_A1,T2_B1`
>        - *"2.Samples"*: 
>            - *"Group Name"*: `T4`
>               - *"Column"*: `T4A_1,T4B_1`
>        - *"3.Samples"*: 
>            - *"Group Name"*: `T7`
>               - *"Column"*: `T7A_1,T7B_1`
>     
>
{: .hands_on}

# **Run metaQuantome**

## *metaQuantome: expand*

The expand module is the first analysis step in the metaQuantome analysis workflow, and can be run to analyze differently expressed Taxa in the samples.
In taxonomy mode, the following information is required apart from metaQuantome databases and samples file: a tab-separated taxonomy annotation file, with a peptide column and a taxonomy annotation column. The taxonomic annotations should be the lowest common ancestor (LCA) for each peptide, preferably given as NCBI taxonomy IDs.

> - The name of the peptide column in the taxonomic annotation file (`peptide`).
> - The name of the taxonomy annotation column in the taxonomy annotation file (`taxon_id`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The name of the peptide column in the taxonomic annotation file (`peptide`)
- The name of the taxonomy annotation column in the taxonomy annotation file (`taxon_id`)
```

>    {: .comment}
>
>    {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

## *metaQuantome: filter*

The filter module is the second step in the metaQuantome workflow. The filter module filters the expanded terms to those that are representative of the data according to the sample parameters the user has specified.

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Filtering the expanded data
>
> 1. {% tool [metaQuantome: filter](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/galaxyp/metaquantome_filter/metaquantome_filter/2.0.0-0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - *"Mode"*: `Taxonomic analysis`
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Samples file"*: `metaQuantome:create samples_file` (output of **metaQuantome: create samples file** {% icon tool %})
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"metaquantome expand file"*: `metaQuantome:expand` (output of **metaQuantome: expand** {% icon tool %})
>    - *"min_peptides"*: `1`
>    - *"min_pep_nsamp"*: `1`
>    - *"min_children_non_leaf"*: `2`
>    - *"min_child_nsamp"*: `1`
>    - *"qthreshold"*: `2`
>
> 2. **Rename** {% icon galaxy-pencil %} the output file to `metaQuantome:Filter`.
>
>
>    > ### {% icon comment %} Comment
>    >

> >    > To learn more about the filter module please read the metaQuantome paper published by Galaxy-P { % cite Easterly2019 %}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>    > To learn more about the filter module please read the metaQuantome paper published by Galaxy-P {% cite Easterly2019 %}.
```

Here were are showing 2 visualizations: **Barplot and Volcano Plot**. The Heatmap and PCA plot for multiple conditions are under development.
There are two outputs of the visualization tool : an **HTML file (figure) and a tabular output containing the plot data**.

## *metaQuantome: visualize*

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Bar chart visualization of Taxonomy in T2 sample.
>
> 1. {% tool [metaQuantome: visualize](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/galaxyp/metaquantome_viz/metaquantome_viz/2.0.0-0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Tabular file from metaQuantome stats or metaQuantome filter"*: `metaQuantome:stat` (output of **metaQuantome: stat** {% icon tool %})
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Samples file"*: `metaQuantome:create samples_file` (output of **metaQuantome: create samples file** {% icon tool %})
>    - *"Mode"*: `Taxonomic analysis`
>        - *"Plot type"*: `Bar Chart (bar)`

> >            - *"Taxonomic rank to restrict to in the plot"*: ``

Reviewer: Missing parameter

>            - *"Mean intensity column name"*: `T2_mean`
> 
>
>    > ### {% icon comment %} Comment
>    > The user has a choice to run Bar plot for T2, T4 and T7 to know the top 5 or 10 most differently expressed taxonomy.
>    > 
>    {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

> ![T2_taxa](../../images/T2_taxa.png){: width="85%"}

Reviewer: Suggest providing a title for this figure.

![T2_taxa](../../images/T2_taxa.png "Bar Chart visualization of Top 5 genus present in T2 sample."){: width="85%"}

> ### {% icon question %} Questions
>
> 1. Can we select any color for the bar chart?
> 2. Can we increase the number of terms to display?
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> >
> > 1. Yes, the available colors are blue, orange, yellow, violet, black and red.
> > 2. Yes, the user can choose their own number, however, the larger the display numbers are the dimensions of the image has to be adjusted accordingly.
> >
> {: .solution}
>
{: .question}

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Bar chart visualization of Taxonomy in T7 sample.
>
> 1. {% tool [metaQuantome: visualize](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/galaxyp/metaquantome_viz/metaquantome_viz/2.0.0-0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Tabular file from metaQuantome stats or metaQuantome filter"*: `metaQuantome:stat` (output of **metaQuantome: stat** {% icon tool %})
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Samples file"*: `metaQuantome:create samples_file` (output of **metaQuantome: create samples file** {% icon tool %})
>    - *"Mode"*: `Taxonomic analysis`

> >        - *"Plot type"*: `Volcano Plot (volcano)`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>        - *"Plot type"*: `Bar Chart (bar)`
```

>            - *"Name of the Corrected p-value column in the stat dataframe"*: `corrected_p_T7_over_T2`
> 
{: .hands_on}

> ![T7_taxa](../../images/T7_taxa.png){: width="85%"}

Reviewer: Suggest providing a title for this figure.

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Bar chart visualization of Taxonomy in T4 sample.
>
> 1. {% tool [metaQuantome: visualize](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/galaxyp/metaquantome_viz/metaquantome_viz/2.0.0-0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Tabular file from metaQuantome stats or metaQuantome filter"*: `metaQuantome:stat` (output of **metaQuantome: stat** {% icon tool %})
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Samples file"*: `metaQuantome:create samples_file` (output of **metaQuantome: create samples file** {% icon tool %})
>    - *"Mode"*: `Taxonomic analysis`
>        - *"Plot type"*: `Bar Chart (bar)`

> >            - *"Taxonomic rank to restrict to in the plot"*: ``

Reviewer: Missing parameter.

>            - *"Mean intensity column name"*: `T4_mean`
>
> 
{: .hands_on}

> ![T4_taxa](../../images/T4_taxa.png){: width="85%"}

Reviewer: Suggest providing a title for this figure.

> ## *metaQuantome: visualize* for Volcano Plots

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## *metaQuantome: visualize* Volcano Plots
```

>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Tabular file from metaQuantome stats or metaQuantome filter"*: `metaQuantome:stat` (output of **metaQuantome: stat** {% icon tool %})
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Samples file"*: `metaQuantome:create samples_file` (output of **metaQuantome: create samples file** {% icon tool %})
>    - *"Mode"*: `Taxonomic analysis`
>        - *"Plot type"*: `Volcano Plot (volcano)`
>            - *"Name of the fold change column in the stat dataframe"*: `log2fc_T4_over_T2`
>            - *"Name of the Corrected p-value column in the stat dataframe"*: `corrected_p_T4_over_T2`
>        - {% icon param-select %} *"Flip the fold change (i.e., multiply log fold change by -1)"*: `No`
> 
>
>    > ### {% icon comment %} Comment
>    >
>    > Here, we show metaQuantome's Taxonomy differential abundance volcano plot. The user may select the significance threshold (0.05 by default), and terms with statistically significant fold changes are colored green and labeled. However, we can currently only compare two conditions at a time. Here we have compared T4 and T2 time points. The user can also perform comparison of T7 and T2.
>    {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

> ![T2-T4-taxa-volcano](../../images/T2-T4-taxa-volcano.png){: width="100%"}

Reviewer: Suggest providing a title for this figure.

![T2-T4-taxa-volcano](../../images/T2-T4-taxa-volcano.png "Volcano plot for differentially expressed taxa comparing sample T4 and T2."){: width="100%"}

> 

Reviewer: @subinamehta  I think it would really helpful to add a section here for the second volcano plot comparing T7 and T2. I like that this step is already a part of the workflow, and I think users would find it useful to include the hands-on step here with the plot of the output so that they can compare to what they get when they go through the tutorial.

       
        
        type: "internal"
        topic_name: proteomics
        tutorials:
            - metaquantome-function
            
requirements:

   -
   
        type: "internal"
        topic_name: proteomics
        tutorials:
           - metaquantome-data-creation

---

# Introduction
{:.no_toc}

metaQuantome {% cite Easterly2019 %} software suite was developed by the {% cite Galaxy-P %} for quantitative and statistical analysis of metaproteomics data. For taxonomic and functional expression analysis within the microbial community, metaQuantome leverages peptide-level quantitative information to generate visual outputs for data interpretation. It also generates outputs that help in understanding the taxonomic contribution to a selected function as well as functions expressed by selected taxonomic group.

In this tutorial, we will learn specifically about the metaQuantome Taxonomy workflow. In particular, we will learn about how peptide-level quantitation and associated taxonomic information can be used to generate bar plots (for taxonomic composition), volcano plots (to detect differentially expressed taxa) and heatmap cluster analysis. 

> To demonstrate the use of this workflow, we have used a thermophilic biogas reactor dataset wherein municipal food waste and manure is digested to generate methane gas (% cite Delogu2020 %)). After one round in the reactor, the microbial community was simplified and enriched via serial dilution. This inoculum was then transferred to a solution of cellulose from Norwegian Spruce and incubated at 65°C. Triplicate samples were taken in a time series from 0 to 43 hours after inoculation and mass spectrometry data was acquired on a Q-Exactive (Thermo) mass spectrometer. For this training, we have chosen three time points (8 hours, 18 hours and 33 hours) from this dataset.

Reviewer 2: curly braces instead of parentheses on citation again

![MetaQuantome-taxonomy-workflow](../../images/mQ-taxa-workflow.jpg){: width="100%"}

> ### Agenda
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

# **Pretreatments**

The first step in a tutorial is to get the data from the zenodo link provided and making sure that it is in the correct format.

## *Get data*

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Data upload
>
> 1. Create a new history for this tutorial and give it a meaningful name
>
>    {% include snippets/create_new_history.md %}
>    {% include snippets/rename_history.md %}
>
> 2. Import the files: a Taxonomy File, an Intensity file from [Zenodo]({{ page.zenodo_link }})
>    or from the shared data library (`GTN - Material` -> `{{ page.topic_name }}` -> `{{ page.title }}`)
>
>    ```
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4110725/files/Intensity-File.tabular
>    https://zenodo.org/record/4110725/files/Taxonomy-File.tabular
>
>    ```
>    {% include snippets/import_via_link.md %}
>    {% include snippets/import_from_data_library.md %}
>
>
> 3. Rename the datasets (If needed).

> > 4. Check that the datatype ( Make sure they are in the correct formats).

Reviewer 2: this sentence is a bit weird

>
{: .hands_on}

# **Download metaQuantome Databases**

> ### {% icon hands_on %} Hands-on: Run metaQuantome databases
>
> 1. {% tool [metaQuantome: databases](https://toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/view/galaxyp/metaquantome_db/7c45aa1c9464) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-select %} *"Databases to Download"*: `Select All` (NCBI Taxonomy Database, Gene Ontology Database and Enzyme Commission (EC) database)
>
> 2. Execute.
>
>    > ### {% icon comment %} Comment
>    >
>    > metaQuantome uses freely available bioinformatic databases to expand your set of direct annotations. 
>    > 
>    > 
>    > The databases are:
>    > 
>    > 1. NCBI taxonomy database. consists of a list of all currently identified taxa and the relationships between them.
>    > 
>    > 2. Gene Ontology (GO) term database. metaQuantome uses the go-basic.obo file and the metagenomics slim GO (subset of the full GO). More details are 
>    > available at http://geneontology.org/docs/download-ontology/
>    > 
>    > 3. ENZYME database with Enzyme Classification (EC) numbers. This database classifies enzymes and organizes the relationships between them.
>    > 
>    {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

> ![MetaQuantome:databases](../../images/mq-db.png){: width="100%"}

Reviewer 2: remove all screenshots of the tool interface from this tutorial too

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

title: "metaQuantome 3: Taxonomy"
zenodo_link: "https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4110725"
questions:
 - "How do I look at differentially expressed taxa?"
 - "Can we get top 5 or 10 taxa present in the sample?"
 - "How can I visualize my results?"
objectives:
  - "A taxonomy and quantitational analysis of metaproteomic mass spectrometry data."
time_estimation: "1h"
key_points:

>   - "Statistical analysis of the differentially expressed taxa in the metaproteomics sample and their abundance."

Reviewer 2: could you change the keypoints again to be take-home messages / conclusions from the tutorial rather than a description of what was done? And same for the function tutorial. (Just like you did with the first metaQuantome tutorial, those were good!)

I think that is the last change needed to merge this, awesome job! :+1:
